+++
Description = "Some advice about moving into data science after completing a PhD in a natural science"
date = "2017-09-04T18:53:49-07:00"
menu = ""
title = "Learning git is not enough: becoming a data scientist after a science PhD"
slug = "data-science-phd"

+++

If you're thinking of leaving post-PhD science for data science then doubtless
people have told you to learn version control.

They're absolutely right. You should. But learning git is not enough.

So, in the spirit of [_A PhD is Not
Enough_](https://smile.amazon.com/PhD-Not-Enough-Survival-Science/dp/0465022227),
a great book about careers in science, here's some advice about moving from
academia into data science after completing a PhD in a natural science.

Unlike _A PhD is Not Enough_, however, this post is not a complete guide to a
career. It's just a collection of (hopefully non-obvious) things that have
occurred to me since I made the move myself three years ago.

And to be clear: none of what I say here applies to you if you have a PhD in
computer science, mathematics, statistics or the humanities.

## Contents

 - [Advice about advice](#advice-about-advice)
 - [Why tech companies shouldn't hire you](#why-tech-companies-shouldn-t-hire-you)
 - [Why tech companies should hire you](#why-tech-companies-should-hire-you)
 - [Salaries](#salaries)
 - [How finding a job is different than in academia](#how-finding-a-job-is-different-than-in-academia)
   - [The visa situation is much tougher](#the-visa-situation-is-much-tougher)
   - [Self-promotion is still valuable](#self-promotion-is-still-valuable)
   - [Changing jobs is easier and more common](#changing-jobs-is-easier-and-more-common)
   - [Not everything has an application form](#not-everything-has-an-application-form)
 - [How to choose where to work](#how-to-choose-where-to-work)

## Advice about advice

Data science is a young discipline, and it's only in the past couple of years
that tech firms have recognized the particular value of an advanced natural
science education.

This means that the people who've being doing data science for long enough to
give advice from a position of experience are very different than the average
science PhD considering leaving academia.

Conversely, data scientists who recently completed a science PhD simply don't
know what they're talking about because they haven't been working (or hiring)
for long enough. I include myself in this category.

People are going to seem like they know what they're talking about, but take
their advice with a big pinch of salt. 

## Why tech companies shouldn't hire you

Before I get into the practical advice, I think it's important to know why you
and your peers are of interest to a hiring manager in tech.

[This is a perfectly reasonable list of things a data scientist should
know](http://www.ericmjl.com/blog/2017/8/31/what-would-be-useful-for-aspiring-data-scientists-to-know/).
On average, science PhDs know this material no better, and often far worse,
than anyone who can solve FizzBuzz.

Tech firms are by now all too aware of this. They know that, left alone, a
typical science PhD cannot build robust, complex software systems. More
fundamentally, science PhDs are often ignorant about the basic tools and
conventions of collaborative software development. I certainly was (and
compared to an undergraduate CS major, I probably still am). 

And yes, most science PhDs are comfortable with some pretty sophisticated ideas
from mathematics and statistics. But they rarely have the breadth of a
statistics or a machine learning PhD. They often lack knowledge of the
particular areas of statistics that come up in industrial data science.

And there's another problem with science PhDs: depending on their thesis
adviser they may have acquired a tendency to treat the word "data" as a plural.
The good news is this absurd habit can be unlearned. The other problems are
more serious.

## Why tech companies should hire you

So why do tech firms hire science PhDs? Science is not perfect, but it's been
pretty successful. And the intellectual posture and methods it uses seems
likely to be partly responsible for that success.

It's difficult to finish a science PhD without acquiring two things:

 - A deeply ingrained attitude of skepticism toward claims made
   about data, including your own.
 - The ability to conduct undirected research programs whose job is to
   determine whether that attitude is warranted.
 
Now, It's possible to get a science PhD without picking these up, and it's
possible to learn them without doing a science PhD. But a random person who has
a PhD is more likely to have learned them than someone without.

I've met machine learning PhDs, the kind of people who get hired at NIPS and
start on $300,000, who neither know nor care about the most fundamental
concerns about experimental data such as sample bias and censorship.

I don't think it's a coincidence that the recently publicized article about
relative merits of men and women in tech was written by a Google engineer who
quit grad school before he had to do any research. It was glib, intellectually
lazy and arrogant. These are things that a modern graduate research education
in a natural science seeks to beat out of you (admittedly not always
successfully).
 
## Salaries

OK, that was kind of philosophical and, coming from someone still trying to
rationalize the fact that he spent 10 years on a science PhD and subsequent
postdocs, probably a little self-serving. 

Here's some practical advice.

Unless you were a very successful academic, you've probably never negotiated
over money. How do you know if an offer is fair? Data!

There are two useful sources of information. The first is the O'Reilly Data
Science Salary Survey ([US 2016
edition](https://www.oreilly.com/ideas/2016-data-science-salary-survey-results),
[European 2017
edition](https://conferences.oreilly.com/strata/strata-eu/public/content/data-science-salary-survey)).
This survey gives you a formula you can use to estimate what people like you
get paid. In my case it's right to within about 10%.

The second useful source is the [H-1B salary
database](http://www.h1bdata.info/). The salaries of people on H-1B visas are
matters of public record. You can search by title and employer. It's not
impossible you'll find the salaries of people who work where you've applied,
doing exactly the job you've applied for. There's nothing like knowing the
salary of your interviewer to levels the playing field during negotiations.

Both data sources are flawed. Naively applied, the O'Reilly formula tells you
that you should subtract $5000-6000 from your salary if your gender is female.
Correlation does not imply causation though, so you should not lower your
expectations or demands based on this (or any other) tendency in their data.

In aggregate, the H-1B data is perhaps even more problematic than the O'Reilly
data. It's dodgy data about a biased sample.

The sample is flawed because H-1B visa holders are atypical. In some situations
they are hired precisely because they have lower salary expectations than US
residents (paying them less than the prevailing rate violates the terms of
their Labor Condition Application, but it happens). In other situations the
employer puts up the with expense and delay of the visa application because
they have unique skills that also make them more valuable.

The data is flawed because the salary information is only recorded at the time
the offer was made, since which it has presumably increased, and it does not
include bonuses or non-cash compensation.

But some information is better than none.

## How finding a job is different than in academia

### The visa situation is much tougher

In most countries, universities find it relatively easy to get visas for
students, postdocs and faculty. Tech companies generally find it much harder.

In the United States, H-1B "application season" is January through February.
You need to have the offer by March so the employer can submit by the first
week of April. You then have a roughly one in four chance of being selected in
the lottery (or slightly higher if you did your PhD in the United States). If
you're selected, you can't actually start work until October 1.

If you have very strong academic credentials, can afford to pay the filing fees
yourself, and are patient then you may be in the running for an O-1 visa. This
has upsides and downsides, but the upside is there is no lottery and no
deadline. If you're going this route, you'll probably need your own attorney. I
cannot recommend [McCormick & Dooley](http://www.mccormickdooleylaw.com/)
highly enough.

### Self-promotion is still valuable

Compared to academia, it's less _necessary_ to give talks, write publicly and
network. But it doesn't stop being incredibly effective. So if it's something
you enjoy, don't stop.

### Changing jobs is easier and more common

A successful academic career consists of a PhD, one or two postdocs, and a
tenure track position you remain in for the rest of your working life.
Opportunities to correct course come up once per year, and don't look good on a
CV.

In tech, it's normal to change jobs every couple of years. By all means try to
get career decisions right, but they are far, far less fraught and irrevocable
than in academia.

### Not everything has an application form

I was an astronomer. When I was applying for jobs in academia I would go to the
[AAS Job Register](https://jobregister.aas.org/), a website that lists every
single vacancy in international astronomy. It's a finite set. The employers
have reputations going back centuries and I'd been reading my potential
managers' work for years.

When I left academia, that was no longer true. Like me, you'll have to do huge
amounts of research to find the vacancies and learn about the employers, their
products and their teams. And you'll never find all the vacancies, because many
of them are never advertised.

I think [Cathy O'Neil sums up the danger here
well](https://mathbabe.org/2012/02/17/how-harvard-is-failing-its-students/).
She's talking about Harvard grads, but this is also true of science PhDs:

> [Harvard grads] are vulnerable to Wall Street investment firms and to things
> like Teach for America because they have application processes at all. But
> life, normal adult life, doesn’t have an application process.

When you leave academia you enter "normal adult life". The lack of an
application form is exciting and overwhelming. You'll get the hang of it.

But until you do, one of the dangers is that boot camps will be seductive
because they'll feel like academia. In some cases they can be exactly what you
need to jump-start your career. But they are not _always necessary_. If you're
planning to do a boot camp, think carefully and honestly about your reasons.

## How to choose where to work

If you'll be working in the engineering division, then make sure you'll be
working alongside experienced software engineers and data engineers. 

And where ever you'll be working, [make sure they have
data](https://twitter.com/i/moments/833025919711207424). There are times to
take a job where this isn't the case, but your first job after a science PhD is
not one of them.

Think about how data science relates to the mission of the company. To that
end, I love sharing [this quote from Stitch
Fix](http://multithreaded.stitchfix.com/blog/2015/03/31/advice-for-data-scientists/):

> A Data Scientist should look for a company that actually uses data science to
> set themselves apart from the competition. When this happens, the company
> becomes supportive to data science instead of the other way around. It's
> willing to invest in acquiring the top talent, building the necessary
> infrastructure, pioneering the latest algorithmic and computational
> techniques, and building incredible engineering products to manifest the data
> science. "Good enough" is not a phrase that is uttered in the context of a
> strategic differentiator.

I don't agree that a data scientist "should" work for a company where data
science is a strategic differentiator. Plenty of people have fulfilling careers
and do great work when that isn't the case.

But the distinction I think they're getting at — do you want your work to be
the center of attention or not? — is a very useful one to think about.

Finally, think about the impact you want to have on the world. One of the
reasons I left academia was to have more of an impact. But the corollary of
having more impact is having more scope to do harm. Data scientists enable
surveillance culture and recapitulate discrimination at scale. For more on
this, read [Weapons of Math
Destruction](https://weaponsofmathdestructionbook.com/) and [Big Data's
Disparate Impact](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2477899).
